---
layout: posts
title: "Assignment 4, log files"
date: 2017-02-11
---
#### Linux Basics (dat8tf063-29)

#### HAAGA-HELIA University of Applied Sciences.

### Basic info:

[Fedora magazine. systemd: using journal](https://fedoramagazine.org/systemd-using-journal/)

`journald` - is a daemon which logs data about systemand running services.

`journalctl` - is a command to interact with journal, without options it gives entire journal content which can be scrolled with arrows.

Journal may be persistent over reboot or not.

`journal -b` - shows data since last boot up.

Example:

	 [liz@localhost log]$ journalctl -b
	 -- Logs begin at Wed 2017-02-08 18:03:24 EET, end at Sat 2017-02-11 20:14:00 EET. --
	 Feb 08 18:03:24 localhost.localdomain systemd-journald[197]: Runtime journal (/run/log/journal/) is 8.0M, max 384.1M, 376.1M free.

It has many fields with metadata. In shown example, first goes info message "Logs begin...", on next line: date and time.
Option `verbose` gives some hints about which field is what:

   [liz@localhost starliz.github.io]$ journalctl -o verbose
   ...
   SYSLOG_IDENTIFIER - systemd-journald,
   JOURNAL_NAME=Runtime journal
   JOURNAL_PATH=/run/log/journal/
   CURRENT_USE_PRETTY=8.0M
   MAX_USE_PRETTY=384.1M
   AVAILABLE_PRETTY=376.1M
   ...

So ths log entry tells from which service is the message, what is the name of journal, what is the path to it,
how much disc space does it take, what is maximum and how much is available.

 


`journalctl -f` - follows current log messages, it allows to see immediately data for actions you do.

[Analyzing Linux logs](https://www.loggly.com/ultimate-guide/analyzing-linux-logs/)


### Some examples:

Some interesting directories to browse logs:

     [liz@localhost log]$ ls -al
     drwxr-xr-x.  2 lp       sys                 4096 Jan 11 18:25 cups
     drwxr-sr-x+  3 root     systemd-journal     4096 Jan 29 15:31 journal




##### “ Copyright 2017 Lidia Zalevskaya, GNU General Public License, version 3 or later.”
